**All indicators**

Temperature: this provides information on the temperature of the ocean
layers closest to the surface. It has a considerable influence on
weather, climate patterns, ocean circulation and biological growth.
Changes in sea surface temperature are often an indicator for marine
environmental change, since change in the habitat of marine organisms
may result. In the models, the temperature is derived from a physical
model of ocean circulation driven by the atmospheric heat fluxes.

**pH:** is a measure of the acidity of the ocean.  As the ocean absorbs
an increasing amount of carbon dioxide the overall pH of the marine
environment is decreasing (becoming more acidic). Many marine organisms
are sensitive to changes in pH, with increasing acidity causing stress
on animal physiology and reproductive success. This may lead to
significant changes in the communities of marine organisms. 

**Primary Production:** This is an indicator of how fast phytoplankton
taking up (absorb) carbon from the ocean through photosynthesis. It is a
measure of how much carbon is available for the whole marine ecosystem
to exploit.

**Chlorophyll:** concentration of chlorophyll is commonly used as an
index for phytoplankton biomass. Phytoplankton are primarily responsible
for turning carbon dioxide into organic carbon and form the basis of the
marine food web sustaining growth the oceans.

**Oxygen:** this indicator provides a measure of dissolved oxygen in the
region. The ocean is an important source of oxygen with around
three-fourths of the earth’s oxygen supply produced as a waste product
by phytoplankton. Oxygen levels can be impacted changes in ocean
temperature and levels of key nutrients such as phosphate and nitrates.

**Euphotic depth:** the euphotic zone or sunlight zone is the depth of
water in the ocean that is exposed to enough sunlight for photosynthesis
to occur. The euphotic depth is where light intensity falls to only one
percent of that at the surface. Euphotic depth can vary greatly
depending on turbidity.

**Mixed layer depth:** this indicator provides information on the
penetration of ocean mixing. The mixed layer is the oceanic surface zone
that most strongly influences oceanatmospheric interactions and has a
strong impact on climate regulation.

**Nitrate:** this indicator provides a measure nitrate in the region.
Nutrients play an important role in the health of marine ecosystems
controlling the abundance of many species of phytoplankton. Change in
the level of nutrients particularly nitrogen, can have significant
impacts on a coastal ecosystems, leading to harmful algal blooms and
hypoxic or low oxygen environments.

**Nitratephosphate ratio:** this provides an indication of the relative
ratio of nitrate to phosphate in the region. Nutrients play an important
role in the health of marine ecosystems controlling the abundance of
many species of phytoplankton or algae. If the ratio of nutrients goes
off balance it can create an unhealthy system by producing either too
much or too little algae.

**Nitratesilicate ratio:** this provides an indication of the relative
ratio of nitrate to silicate in the region. Nutrients play an important
role in the health of marine ecosystems controlling the abundance of
many species of phytoplankton or algae. If the ratio of nutrients goes
off balance it can create an unhealthy system by producing either too
much or too little algae.

**Phosphate:** this indicator provides information about the levels of
phosphate in the region. Phosphorus is a limiting nutrient for aquatic
organisms and enters the ocean from the land rather than the atmosphere.
Phosphates come from fertilizers and sewage entering the ocean as run
off causing pollution and eutrophication.

**Ammonia:**this indicates levels of ammonia in the region. Nutrients
play an important role in the health of marine ecosystems controlling
the abundance of many species of phytoplankton. Change in the level of
nutrients can have significant impacts on a marine ecosystem, effecting
rates of primary production.

**pCO2:** this indicator is a measure of partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (pCO~2~)in the ocean's surface waters. pCO~2~ provides
information on the cycling of dissolved carbon and associated chemicals
(oxygen, nitrogen, phosphorus). PCO~2~ varies with alkalinity, latitude,
depths and temperature and is also affected by biological processes in
the ocean.

**Phytoplankton:** are microscopic organisms that produce energy through
photosynthesis.  They are responsible for the transformation of carbon
dioxide into organic carbon which sustains the growth of all other
organisms in the ocean. Biomass is a measure of the abundance of
phytoplankton in the ocean.

Zooplankton: are a group of small marine organisms, which feed on
phytoplankton and each other. They are the link in the marine food web
between phytoplankton and fish.

**Potential Energy Anomaly:** this indicator provides a measure of the
stability of the water column. This provides information about
stratification and mixing in the water column and is important to help
understand physical mechanisms in the ocean.

**Salinity:** this indicator provides a measure of salt in the ocean.
Salinity levels have a significant impact on global weather patterns,
with small changes having large impacts.

**Silicate:** this indicator provides a measure silicate in the region.
Nutrients play an important role in the health of marine ecosystems
controlling the abundance of many species of phytoplankton. Silicate has
a particular role in the regulation of diatoms which use it to construct
their cell walls. Diatom contribute strongly to primary production and
their levels are affected by the availability and distribution of
silicate.

**Adult cod:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet biomass of
all adult cod in the region. The Atlantic cod (*Gadus morhua*) is a
well-known benthopelagic fish belonging to the family Gadidae widely
consumed by humans.

**Adult herring:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet
biomass of all adult herring in the region. The Atlantic herring,
*Clupea harengus*, is a pelagic species and an important prey for a
number of predators, including cod.

**Juvenile cod:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet biomass
of juvenile cod in the region.

**Juvenile herring:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet
biomass of juvenile herring in the region.

**Plaice:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet biomass of
plaice in the region. Plaice is a demersal species generally living on
sandy substrates but may also be found on mud and gravel. There are
important commercial fisheries for this species in this region.

**Sandeels:** This is a modelled indication of the total wet biomass of
sandeels in the region. Sandeels form the basis of a number of fisheries
and are key prey for marine fish, mammals and seabirds.

**Seabirds:** This is a modelled indication of the biomass of seabirds
in the system. Seabirds are useful environmental indicators as they
represent the top of the food chain and changes in their populations can
indicate changes at lower trophic levels or in the physic-chemical
environment. They are also easily affected by human activities such as
over exploitation of their food source ie fishing and marine pollution.

**Anchovy:**This is a modelled indication of the biomass anchovy in the
region. Not only are their important commercial fisheries for anchovy,
they also provide a significant food source for almost all predatory
fish, marine mammals and seabirds in their environment.

**Sardine:** This is a modelled indication of the biomass sardine in the
region. Sardines are commercially important for a number of reasons used
not only for immediate consumption but also for bait and for reduction
into oil and fishmeal for the aquaculture industry.




